doc: overhaul sample criteria and expectations (#78024)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: samples/sample_definition_and_criteria.rst

Samples should be limited in scope and should focus only on demonstrating non-trivial or
essential aspects of the subsystem(s) or module(s) being highlighted.

> Samples are recommended when submitting new features, however they are not mandatory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Samples are recommended when submitting new features; however, they are not mandatory.
```

  * If a sample can provide output that can be verified, then output should be evaluated against
    expected value to have some level of testing for the sample itself.
    Refer to :ref:`twister_script` for more details.

  * Although being able to run a sample successfully does verify the
    functionality is working as expected, this should not replace dedicated and
    comprehensive tests with full coverage to be submitted into the
    :zephyr_file:`tests/` folder.  In a sample, the only thing you test is

>     buildability and in some cases if a sample performing as expected, i.e. you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    buildability and, in some cases, if a sample is performing as expected, i.e. you
```

        sample.kernel.cond_var:
          integration_platforms:
            - native_sim
          tags:
            - kernel
            - condition_variables
          harness: console
          harness_config:
            type: one_line
            regex:
              - ".*Waited and joined with 3 threads"

  * Do not mark the test as build only. A sample should be able to build and
    run on the documented platforms. Use the harness option to skip the
    execution. Twister only attempts to flash and execute the build binary if
    the harness is set to ztest or console.
  * The default configuration for the sample should be in the ``prj.conf``
    file and should be operational on all supported platforms. Do not rely on the
    ``extra_args`` or ``extra_configs`` options in the YAML file to build the
    sample.
  * The tests should verify the default configuration of the sample and any
    optional features documented in the sample's README file. Sample should
    never be used to test functionality of the subsystem or module the sample

>     belongs to.

Reviewer 2: > Sample should never be used to test functionality of the subsystem or module the sample belongs to.

Don't quite understand this, isn't the purpose of the various samples to test/show functionality of the subsystem, at least in networking samples do that.

Author: show functionality: yes, act as a test: no.
Obviously when you run a sample you test something, but this should not replace actual tests with full coverage under tests/.
In a sample, the only thing you test is buildability and in some cases if a sample performing as expected, i.e. you are testing the sample, not the subsystem.

Reviewer 2: Sure, I agree fully. It was just not clear from the text what it actually means. Perhaps some of your clarification text could be added to the document.

Author: @jukkar  done

        sample.kernel.cond_var:
          integration_platforms:
            - native_sim
          tags:
            - kernel
            - condition_variables
          harness: console
          harness_config:
            type: one_line
            regex:
              - ".*Waited and joined with 3 threads"

>   * Do not mark the test as build only. A sample should be able to build and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Do not mark the test as build only. A sample should be able to build *and*
```

>     run on the documented platforms. Use the harness option to skip the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    run on the documented platforms. Use the ``harness`` option to skip the
```

    execution. Twister only attempts to flash and execute the build binary if

>     the harness is set to ztest or console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    the harness is set to ``ztest`` or ``console``.
```

>   * The default configuration for the sample should be in the ``prj.conf``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The default configuration for the sample must be in the :file:`prj.conf`
```

Also, as a general comment: maybe all the occurences of SHOULD / MUST / DO NOT, etc. at the beginning of each bullet point should be put in capital letters?

    file and should be operational on all supported platforms. Do not rely on the
    ``extra_args`` or ``extra_configs`` options in the YAML file to build the
    sample.
  * The tests should verify the default configuration of the sample and any
    optional features documented in the sample's README file. Sample should
    never be used to test functionality of the subsystem or module the sample
    belongs to.
  * Any documented configuration options related to the sample and its
    operation can be verified using ``extra_args`` or

>     ``extra_configs`` options in the YAML file. The `prj.conf` file should have the

Reviewer: sphinx-lint will catch this! yay

```suggestion
    ``extra_configs`` options in the YAML file. The :file:`prj.conf` file should have the
```

    base configuration options.

>   * Sample output can be validated leveraging the ``harness_config`` regex option,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Sample output can be validated by leveraging the ``harness_config`` regex option,
```

    wherever applicable.

>   * Use ``platform_allow`` to limit test to the platforms the sample was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Use ``platform_allow`` to limit test to the platforms the sample was actually
```

    verified on. Those platforms should be listed in the sample's README file.
  * Make use of ``integration_platforms`` to limit the scope when there are timing or
    resource constraints. Ideally, one platform should be enough to verify the
    sample when changes are submitted to the Zephyr tree via a pull-request.
  * Make the sample as generic as possible. Avoid making a sample platform specific unless it is
    for particular hardware.

> 3. A sample should provide sufficient coverage of a subsystem, feature, or module.

Reviewer: FWIW I have mixed feelings about this section as it contains a lot of redundant information (if we people don't get it by now that samples must not be unit tests!) and the wording might be confusing: we ask for "sufficient coverage of a subsytesm" when earlier we advise to not use samples to test subsystems.
No immediate action needed though as it is OK enough as-is and can be improved in later PRs.

Author: coverage as in 'feature coverage', try to demonstrate as much as possible of a subsystem to be usable and submit thin content leaving much behind.

Reviewer: yup, I know that's what this is *supposed* to mean, hence why I said I think it's *confusing* as other people not aware of the "gating" we're trying to establish might interpret "coverage" in a different way. Like I said, will likley tackle this in a follow-up PR but I guess where my head is at is rewording/summarizing this along the lines of "A sample should demonstrate an actual use case" or something in that vein.
